content/about.md, before:

---
layout: page
permalink: /about/
title: About me
modified: 2015-02-02T13:13:14
---

I am a _co-founder of iwantmyname_ and _founder of springtimesoft_, a _mentor_
for early stage startups and a _regular at Startup Weekends_, a _startup
punk_ that will challenge all your established assumptions about
companies. I'm a _coder_, a _hacker_ and a _good friend_ to those who know me.

## Bio

Lenz is founder of Springtimesoft Consulting, a Wellington New Zealand
based consulting agency and co-founder of iwantmyname, a global player
in the domain name industry. Prior to moving to New Zealand Lenz was
part of fast growing startups in Germany and did his fair share in
corporate IT management.

Lenz has been managing teams for most of his adult life and is known to
run highly effective and motivated teams that deliver exceptional
results without compromises in happiness. Lenz is a mentor for startups
at any stage of development and helps drive many industry activities
that help grow a better startup community in New Zealand and world wide.
Pay him coffee/beer and he will happily give you feedback on your
current project or open up his network to find the person you need.

## Images

<img src="/images/lenz/lenz-300x300.jpg">

large version: <a href="/images/lenz/lenz.jpg">right click to download</a>

## old blogs and sites

- [norbu09.wordpress.com](https://norbu09.wordpress.com/) - a blog in German about us moving to NZ
- [about.me/norbu09](http://about.me/norbu09) - about.me page for those who are into that

Commit message:

added post about beeing hooked on phones

content/about.md, after:

---
layout: page
permalink: /about/
title: About me
tags: [Lenz Gschwendtner, norbu09, startup, blog]
modified: 2017-30-11T11:22:14
---

I have been building fast growing startups for most of my adult life. I have
invested a lot of time into mentoring entrepreneurs and love helping people to
find their confidence to try something new, something that is way outside their
comfort zone. I love the buzz when those things take off and see how people
thrive in their new roles.

I am actively working on ideas of my own and in teams with others. I am living a
location independent life, mainly in New Zealand but also in Europe and other
places around the world. I love minimalism and try to live with a net positive
impact on my environment.

## Bio

Lenz has started his first company straight out of school, joined mid-size
companies in Germany and Austria after that to learn more about building teams
and robust infrastructure. In 2002 he joined his first startup and was hooked by
the pace. After moving to New Zealand he started a consulting firm and a domain
registrar, both are still going strong and _springtimesoft consulting_ is now
operating in New Zealand and Australia and _iwantmyname_ is a global player in
the domain industry.

Lenz has been an organiser, mentor and facilitator of Startup Weekends
since 2012 and spoke at many conferences about open source and other geeky
topics. He has also been involved in a great number of hackathons, meetups and
other community building activities. Lenz is a grassroots guy that has never
waited for official permission to build a thriving community - a punk that will
get his hands dirty to make sure people around him have the means to build their
dreams.

## Images

<img src="/images/lenz/lenz-300x300.jpg">

large version: <a href="/images/lenz/lenz.jpg">right click to download</a>

## old blogs and sites

- [norbu09.wordpress.com](https://norbu09.wordpress.com/) - a blog in German about us moving to NZ
- [about.me/norbu09](http://about.me/norbu09) - about.me page for those who are into that
