content/now.md, before:

---
layout: page
permalink: /now/
title: "now - my current priorities"
modified: 2015-10-22 09:40
---

This is a page that lists my current priorities and projects. The order
is somewhat significant but not a strict rule. 

*Last update: 2016-01-06T12:54:16*


Areas of activity
-----------------

1. [iwantmyname](https://iwantmyname.com) is a big focus for me at the
   moment
2. get some balance from working on a computer, currently:
    - building a new camper
    - building a wooden kayak
3. learn and teach, currently:
    - startup weekends and working with early stage teams
    - meet interesting people and friends face to face
    - learning [elixir](http://elixir-lang.org/)
4. outdoorsy things, currently:
    - hiking, exploring the southern alps
    - kayaking 
    - snowboarding season is over :(
5. new stealth project will start to take over time

Physical locations
------------------

I am in Nelson every Thursday, based at the [Bridge Street
Collective](http://www.bridgestreet.co.nz/). I normally have time for
one or two coffee meetings there. Focus: 5, 3

I am in Wellington at least every other week for a day or two. Many of
these days are packed with meetings and spending time with my teams
here. If I don't get in touch or push your coffee meeting out another
month, this is why. Focus: 1, 3

The rest of the time I hide in the southern alps and focus on 1, 2, 4 and
5

Commit message:

fixed location of now.md

content/now.md, after:

---
layout: page
permalink: /now/
title: "now - my current priorities"
modified: 2019-07-06
tags: []
image:
  feature: 
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
share: 
---

This is a page that lists my current priorities and projects. The order
is somewhat significant but not a strict rule. 

*Last update: 2019-07-06


areas of activity
-----------------

my main focus is on cleaning up all the things i started in the past years. i
am in a mode of removing me from everything i have done to free me up for the
next journey.

the next journey is going to be an experiment in micro companies that i can run
by myself from anywhere. the goal is to find a way to add value with the
absoloute minimum amount of ressource impact.

physical locations
------------------

i am currently in the process of becoming truely location independent. the
latest iteration in that experiment involves a sailboat and we are moored up in
La Rochelle, France to get the boat ready for the next years of sailing and
living on a boat.
